
# 🚀 Java OOP (Object-Oriented Programming) - Complete Notes

In this article, you'll take a deep dive into a crucial aspect of Java that is essential for mastering Data Structures and Algorithms: Object-Oriented Programming (OOP).

## Introduction

Object-Oriented Programming, often abbreviated as OOP, is a programming paradigm based on the concept of Classes and Objects, which can contain data and code to manipulate that data. Understanding OOP is vital as it allows for more organized, modular, and reusable code, which is particularly important when dealing with complex problems in Data Structures and Algorithms.

## Classes and Objects

### Class

In Java, a class serves as a blueprint or a template for creating objects. A class encapsulates data for the object and methods to manipulate that data. Code in Java is typically defined within a class, as Java is an object-oriented programming language, which means that almost everything revolves around the concept of objects and classes.

### Object

An object is an instance of a class. When a class is defined, no memory is allocated or action performed until an object is created from that class. An object is a real-world entity that represents the specific instance of the blueprint (class). It holds actual data in the form of attributes and can perform actions using the methods defined in the class.

## Access Specifiers

Access specifiers in Java determine the visibility and accessibility of classes, methods, and variables. The most common access specifiers are:

- `public`: When a class or method is declared as public, it is accessible from anywhere in the program.
- `private`: Declaring something as private restricts its access to within the class it is declared in.
- `protected`: A protected entity is accessible within its own package and by subclasses.

If no access specifier is used, Java assigns a default access level, known as package-private, meaning the class or method is accessible only within its own package.

## The Main Method and Its Role

Here is a code snippet to print "Hello World" on the console in Java.

```java
class Basics {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello World");
    }
}
```

Let us understand this code snippet piecewise.

### Basics (Class Name)

In the code snippet, the class name is "Basics" which must resemble the name of the Java file for proper execution.

### Main Method

The main method in Java serves as the entry point for any Java application. The Java runtime starts the execution of a program with the main method.

### public (Access Specifier)

In the code snippet, the access specifier given to the main class is public allowing it to be accessed from anywhere in the program.

### static Keyword

The static keyword is crucial because it allows the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) to call the main method without creating an instance of the class. This is necessary because the main method is executed before any objects of the class are created.

### void

This represents the return type of the main method. It is kept void if nothing is returned from the function.

### String[] args

This is required to store the Command Line Inputs (if passed) when executing the JAVA program using a Command Line.

### Statement

A statement to print "Hello World" is added inside the main method.

## Static Methods

A static method belongs to the class rather than any instance of the class. This allows for calling a static method directly using the class name without the need to create an object.

```java
ClassName.methodName();
```

This is particularly useful for utility or helper methods that perform tasks independent of any object's state.

## Creating and Using Objects

In Java, objects are instances(copies) of classes. To access non-static methods, an object of the class must be created using the `new` keyword, followed by the class constructor.

```java
ClassName objName = new ClassName();
```

Now, the objects are instances of class. It holds actual data in the form of attributes and can perform actions using the methods defined in the class.

For example:

```java
// Test class
class Test {
    int age;

    public void assignAge(int num) {
        // Assign the number to age
        age = num;
    }
}

class Basics {
    public static void main(String[] args) {

        // Creating an object having name test1 of Test class
        Test test1 = new Test();
        test1.assignAge(10);

        // Creating an object having name test2 of Test class
        Test test2 = new Test();
        test2.assignAge(19);

        System.out.println(test1.age);
        System.out.println(test2.age);
    }
}
```

In the above code snippet, there are two objects (instances) of Test Class that are created. Both are assigned a different value of age. Since, all the objects are independent from each other, object named "test1" will hold the age 10, whereas object names "test2" will hold the age 19.

> Note: All the objects created of a particular class are completely independent from each other. Any changes done in one object will not reflect in others.

## Arguments in Methods

Arguments are the values or variables passed to a function or method when it is called. These arguments provide the necessary inputs that the function uses to perform its operations.

```java
class Test {
    public int sum(int num1, int num2) {
        // Return the sum
        return num1 + num2;
    }
}

class Basics {
    public static void main(String[] args) {

        // Creating an object of class Test
        Test test = new Test();

        // Sum two numbers using test object
        int sum = test.sum(10, 15);

        // Display the result
        System.out.println(sum);
    }
}
```

This program contains a class named Test, having a method named sum which takes two integer values num1 and num2 as its arguments. When this method is called, two values 10 and 15 are passed as parameters for the method which get stored in the variables num1 and num2 respectively.

## Constructors

In Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) in Java, a constructor is a special type of method used to initialize objects. It is called automatically when an object of a class is created. The constructor's main role is to set initial values for the object's attributes and perform any necessary setup tasks.

### Key Points

- Same Name as Class: A constructor has the same name as the class it belongs to.
- No Return Type: Constructors do not have a return type, not even void.
- Called Automatically: When an object is created using the new keyword, the constructor is called automatically.
- Types of Constructors: Java provides two types of constructors: Default Constructor and Parameterized Constructor.

### Types of Constructors

#### Default Constructor

A default constructor is a constructor that has no parameters. If no constructor is defined in a class, Java automatically provides a default constructor that initializes object fields to their default values.

#### Parameterized Constructor

A parameterized constructor allows passing arguments to the constructor so that specific values can be assigned to object attributes at the time of creation.

> Note: In Java, a class can have multiple constructors, a concept known as constructor overloading. This allows the class to have different constructors with varying parameters. Each constructor can perform different initializations based on the number or type of arguments passed during object creation.

## Encapsulation

Encapsulation is one of the core concepts of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP). It refers to the practice of bundling data (variables) and methods (functions) that operate on the data into a single unit, known as a class, and restricting direct access to the data from outside the class.

### Key Points

- Data Hiding: Encapsulation hides the internal details of how an object works.
- Controlled Access: Through encapsulation, only specific methods are provided to access or modify the data.

```java
class BankAccount {
    private int balance;  // Private variable (data hiding)

    // Public method to access the balance
    public int getBalance() {
        return balance;
    }

    // Public method to modify the balance
    public void setName(int newBalance) {
        balance = newBalance;
    }
}
```

In this example, the balance variable is private, so it can't be accessed directly from outside the BankAccount class. It can only be accessed or modified using the getBalance() and setName() methods, which provide controlled access to the data.

## Inheritance

Inheritance is a core concept of Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) that allows a class to inherit properties and behaviors (fields and methods) from another class. It helps in reusing existing code and creating a hierarchical relationship between classes.